this is Daniel Martin I'm here with
Robin Hansen and David Deutsch yesterday
I was asked if I'd like to help moderate
a conversation so here we are have fun
and Robin do you have a question for
David
David it's great to talk to you uh I
like you I'm a big fan
um same here I've spent a lot of my
career doing various kinds of future
forecasting I hear you're not entirely a
fan of all of that so I wanted to ask
more specifically which kinds of
forecasting you do or don't like and
just to start with very concrete
examples
so for example solar power costs have
been falling steadily and there's a
standard power law relationship that
predicts that fall of costs and in fact
surveys of Technology show that more
than half of Technologies do Follow That
Power law of cost as a function of the
quantity produced I presume you're okay
with that kind of forecasting not
entirely okay actually because uh you
seem to be when you say
um half of all whatever you said
Innovations or whatever Technologies
um you'll kind of implicitly assume it
that's a frequency half of them and
you're kind of assuming that that's
equal to a probability namely uh you
know where it's going to be uh there's
there's a there's a probability of a of
one half that in the the particular
Innovation we're considering like solar
power solar power or whatever will
follow that law
and that's that's the kind of inference
I think isn't valid
however
I think part of the reason I I think it
may not be as bad as it sounds because
part of the reason why people
um for example confuse frequency and
probability in in their their language
and why they express
forecasts in terms of probability and
then use frequency to judge that is that
there's a there's an unspoken assumption
there which is also about the technology
like like you know that that
um for example the maximum distance that
a human can travel from has will travel
from Earth as a function of time is may
have
followed a certain law until we reach
the edge of the atmosphere and Then
followed a completely different law
between the Earth and the moon and then
we'll follow a completely different law
again from the Moon to Mars and when you
talk about
solar power
you are implicitly referring not only to
the statistics but to a mental model
that you have or Theory or explanatory
theory that you have about that specific
technology
and although the answer you get is
entirely derived from that explanatory
Theory and not from the statistics
it doesn't matter if they match well
and for example in the in the in the
case of uh solar power I think it's
correct although the that power law will
eventually stop
and it may stop before the laws of
physics say so if
there are contingent factors that stop
it
so I mean I think you are right that
we'd like to talk in terms of
frequencies because it's a safer thing
to say and we are implicitly trying to
get someone to think in terms of
probabilities uh as the thing we're
trying to get in their head but because
it's harder to justify a claim about a
probability than a frequency we we speak
in terms of frequencies
uh and of course whenever we see a trend
like the solar power Trend we can't be
con overwhelmingly confident that it
will continue forever and we should have
a substantial you know expectation that
it might deviate soon uh but
nevertheless we might say well look if
the standard here is just better than
chance if we're just trying to
understand the future surely we have to
do things like this like find the kind
of trends that Technologies follow and
pick the one that's most common and if
it seems to fit the trajectory so far
surely we'd want to do something like
projecting that forward we want to have
some degree of uncertainty about that
projection but isn't it a reasonable
thing to do to take our best fit to pass
data and then try to use it to project
future data I mean I think it's a
reasonable thing to do if our best
explanations
um imply that so uh I think the the
futurologists of the 1960s had a phrase
um
a surprise free
forecast
and a surprise free forecast is is them
saying don't blame us if we turned out
if this turns out to be false because we
will always be able to look back and say
ah this thing happened and it and it
wasn't in our in our predictions but
we're surprised by it well a surprise
again they're referring to explanations
there a surprise free a surprising
outcome is one that your best
explanation didn't foretell
so a surprise free one is is what will
happen if your current explanation is
true but then
you know everything hangs on your
current explanation
but nevertheless surely I mean we do
look at say solar power and it does look
similar to many other kinds of
Technologies and we are implicitly using
our sense of what the nature of solar
power is compared to other kinds of say
electronic Technologies to compare it to
say electronic Technologies or materials
Technologies and then when we and then
we are looking at sort of rates of
patterns that we've seen in those and
and we are using many things we know to
make this judgment that say solar power
would probably follow this Powerball at
least for a while nevertheless isn't it
a reasonable thing to to do all of that
taking everything we know and using that
to make predictions about the future of
solar power I I I mean I don't know that
much about the details of solar power
but I I I'm assuming that that is a good
assumption but you're you're making an
assumption there about a very complex
and detailed thing when you say this is
like other Technologies you you mean not
only that the graphs look the same you
you mean that you expect
solar power technology to be dependent
on making factories which use materials
of a certain kind which aren't going to
be throttled by a hostile foreign power
and so on and it that it it's not going
to be
something that you haven't foreseen like
for example if you were if you were
predicting the future of power stations
in 1900 you wouldn't be expecting
nuclear power stations
so your your forecast
based on the best existing knowledge
would not be just out by
a factor it would be out by by and
having the wrong explanation which would
make the the real things behave in a
different way not just be quantitatively
different and and then as I as I uh I've
written somewhere was it in in beginning
of infinity I can't remember but after
radioactivity was discovered you could
have then made the prediction that okay
uh technology will harness that and then
you wouldn't have been able to predict
the environmental movement which will
sabotage that
so you you would have been completely
wrong again about okay but but yeah I
mean if the standard here is can you
ever predict things perfectly with
certainty of course we're going to agree
no but if the opposite standard is you
can't ever predict anything whatsoever
compared to some like absolute chance
that's wrong too so isn't obviously the
question what can you predict how well
not can you predict the future and then
we want to go through particular topics
and just point out the various degrees
to which we might be more or less
confident and accurate in any one
prediction so isn't it come down to
those details uh it comes down to the
explanatory details so uh like you know
I I like to say when when people ask me
about say Bitcoin
I I talk in terms of whether someone's
going to win the fields medal or not
for for cracking it and that that makes
it clear that part of the answer to this
question is unknowable
I I I can't tell whether the the
someone's going to tomorrow discover a
piece of mathematics that wins the field
medal and invalidates Bitcoin
so uh if we think about predicting a
longer time scales of course all else
equal that should be harder but then if
we go to the most solid things we know
the things we are the most confident in
it would seem like that's where we have
the best chance of making the longer
term predictions and so since I tend to
make longer term predictions and you
might be especially you know wary of
those then it would seem like to focus
on these most solid predictions so one
of the most solid predictions I would
based on is say uh the speed of light as
a limitation on causal influence I might
say we're limited to our future light
code
and that has consequences uh substantial
consequences for the future now I'm
going to admit that of course yes that
might be wrong but surely it's
reasonable to tentatively guess that
maybe that is a fundamental limit and
explore those limits making them
explicitly conditional saying yes this
could be wrong and here's how but we're
pretty sure of the speed of light limits
so let's go with that and analyze that
so for example uh you know I've done
some work on predicting where aliens are
in space and time and that's based on
this Assumption of the light cone
limitation if the light cone limitation
weren't there then basically any alien
anywhere in the universe could be here
right now
because there would be no limits on
where the how fast they could get places
and therefore if there's no aliens now
we would have to predict there's no
aliens anywhere because or anyone who
want to get here because anyone could
get here but with the light cone limit
then we could say aha only the aliens in
our backward light cone could be here
and therefore then we can make many more
concrete predictions about you know the
nature of the advanced development of
advanced life based on that and that's
something that I have done recently and
it seems like again a reasonable
tentative thing to do is to assume that
the Litecoin is limited it's also
another basic implication is that you
know it seems like exponential growth in
of things we care about is hard to
continue in in a late con limited world
because the light cone only expands the
volume at a cube rate and exponential
growth requires much faster growth so
isn't it reasonable to say well it looks
like exponential growth can't go on
forever if we're limited to the future
light cone so so I think that those kind
of uh speculations or predictions are
very legitimate in fact uh we ought to
be making them because
um it is a way of exploring the
consequences the the cast iron
consequences of our existing best
knowledge and there I think it makes
very little difference to say
whether you make the mistake of saying
we're doing this because we're
relatively very sure of the speed of
light limitation and so on or whether
you say
this prediction is subject to to no
Nobel Prize being one uh invalidating it
those are pretty much the same thing
although I think it's just wrong to say
that we're sure of something we we
should not believe things
um but for some purposes like in this
case it doesn't matter but
although
it is very legitimate to make
speculations based on the finiteness of
the speed of light
I think going on to say that will then
have consequences for what we say about
our future that's a bit more a bit more
rickety because
we don't know that the limiting factor
in our future will be accessibility of
stars basically or galaxies in the
longer run because we might we might
expand downwards
um like Feynman said there's plenty of
room at the bottom and there's not an
infinite amount of room at the bottom so
then I would invoke thermodynamics and
the fact that Nick entropy seems to be
finite and to say that's going to set a
finite limit on the amount of room at
the bottom and that also sets a limit on
our future growth in terms of neg
entropy because entropy is bounded by a
finite spatial density of Mega entropy
and a finite volume uh by the speed of
light
now now you're talking about things that
are not as secure
as the finiteness of the speed of light
for example there isn't an infinite
amount of room at the bottom is
something that crazy theories of quantum
gravity have contradicted
they may not be our best theories that
but but they're not they're not
completely they don't predict infinite
amounts of neg entropy at the bottom
they predict infinite amounts of
potential structure if you add it again
to be that is you can add enough energy
free energy to a system then you could
create lots of small-scale structure but
you know we do have even within quantum
gravity standard theories of the
finiteness of neg entropy say within the
you know volume or within the black hole
et cetera and then I could appeal to
those but I mean I'm happy to take your
point that any one analysis could have
more ways it could be wrong we could
sort of count the ways same thing could
be wrong but we'd kind of like a way to
to weigh all the different ways
something can be wrong in some sort of
overall measure and that's what people
usually use probability for so you don't
want to use probability that you need
some other way to count but we do
roughly want to see for anyone thinking
how much it depends on things we might
be wrong about and make a judgment about
focusing on the things we are going to
be the most confident of and
it may not affect the bottom line that
much in in many cases but I I think uh
it is simply wrong to use probability in
that way and it would be better to make
the assumptions explicit rather than say
you know well well you know it's it's
not going to be we're not going to
supersede the the second order and
thermodynamics or something by the way
thermodynamics
at least in one version of it depends on
information Theory information Theory uh
has been
overturned I mean Shannon information
Theory uh has has been
overturned by Quantum information Theory
so for example supplanted perhaps is a
better word I mean you know still most
of the most of the results in
information Theory are still true in
Quantum information Theory most of the
usual claims about information still
continue there so the classic entropy
remains finite in Quantum information
Theory
it does but the fact that that uh
entropy is governed by slightly
different laws
and that these these allow exponentially
more information to apparently exist
in some situations and not others means
that we have to change our conception of
information and then our conception of
information
may or may not feed into the Practical
conclusions that we want this
information Theory to to inform but but
the amount of neg entropy in this CL in
this glass is not substantially Changed
by Quantum information Theory we could
still say you know if if that's all you
have then and you can only grow it at a
certain rate then that means our future
economy descendants can only grow at a
certain rate I mean that's still a
robust conclusion even if we switch to
Quantum information it it happens to be
so for Quantum information Theory but
Quantum information Theory allows
information channels to transmit twice
as much information as classical
channels
so it it would have been you know if
we've been having this conversation 40
years ago or whatever it is whenever a
channel capacity doubling was invented
we would have said you know we know for
sure that if an object can hold two dist
it can be in two distinguishable States
and used for information transfer then
the rate at which it transfers
information is is also one bit per unit
time or whatever it is but it's actually
two
so now we couldn't have predicted that
it won't be 10 or 50 or or infinite
say you were with me on a project to
develop a nuclear reactor for thorium
you know you might have some
qualifications for that right and say
I'm a part of this project and I'm
trying to cut you know work out a
tentative design for our thorium reactor
and some tentative ways to test this and
I kind of makes them you know suggested
claims to you that this particular
design could have this rate and this
density and this heat conductivity Etc
and then for any tentative design I
offered you you could play the same game
you're playing now and say well yeah but
you're using standard information Theory
and what about potential future
information theories and you're assuming
standard gravity and what about
potential future gravities and I might
say well you're not helping very much to
design this reactor if you're going to
point out all the logical ways it could
be wrong don't you want to like make
some intensive assumptions like get in
here in the game right let's help design
something and that's the way I want to
ask about the future I want to say don't
we want to think about the future yes of
course we could be wrong well shouldn't
we like
take our best understanding and make
some tentative guesses here
we could be wrong is a is a bad
objection because you could always make
it
and uh so you you've got to
um for you you have to
um reject on principle all uh objections
to a project that are of the form we
could be wrong our best explanations
could be wrong
um
so
I'm not objecting to that part and I
wouldn't be making those objections to
the thorium reactor and I don't make
those objections to your uh analysis of
um
future aliens uh occupying Galactic
clusters and so on it's all legitimate
stuff then let's talk more specifically
about some other ways we could guess
about the future and then we could say
specifically like what assumptions we're
worried about being wrong that such my
derail the analysis but let's just talk
about particular things we could guess
about the future right so so for example
we might say future stock prices will
follow a random walk just like current
stock prices do because our theory of
why stock prices follow a random walk is
very solid theory about information
basically it's an information-based
theory about the random walk and you say
as long as the information Theory holds
then future prices should follow a
random walk does that sound like a
reasonable
a long-term claim I mean I go out a
million years and say in a million years
in the future stock prices will follow a
random walk because unless information
theory has dramatically changed that'll
just be true yes so I I would so I agree
with the conclusion but but uh I I would
be explicit about the explanatory
assumption there to me the explanatory
assumption there is basically that if
that were not so then
um Speculator could make money out of it
not being so and eventually it would
become so and therefore it will be so so
I think that's an epistemological
argument fundamentally
and
um therefore I would say it's it's uh we
can expect that to be true until
somebody wins a Nobel prize in economics
for showing that the epistemology okay
what we think it is
but for most purposes in the world it's
perfectly reasonable to take what we
think we know now and apply it even if a
Nobel Prize might be won someday for
showing that it's wrong right yes and so
so for example there's a whole
literature on evolutionary investment
which talks about if there's an
evolutionary competition between
different investment strategies what
would be the investment strategies that
win in the long run and that's based on
something called The Kelly Rule and
there's a theorem basically that uh
the maximum investment would have to
invest in proportion to the Future final
value of different investment categories
and that seems pretty solid to me at
least given the assumptions that there'd
be some evolutionary competition among
investors such that the one who who
invest more successfully you know
reproduce and become more confident yes
and uh on underneath the assumption that
there might be investors who have
certain objectives they're again
epistemological assumptions about how
how success in achieving things can come
about when people cooperate and I think
those theories are true
the and and therefore as I keep saying I
think in many cases the bottom line is
the same whether we are explicit about
um the explanatory basis of the
prediction or not but in some cases you
know you can wander off you I think you
just did it just now where the speed of
light being constant is a different
assumption different species of
assumption from the assumption that
there aren't the the the the amount of
information carrying capacity at small
scales is is not infinite that those are
two different kinds of thing because yes
one of them is kind of saying well we
don't know about it we uh you know
therefore it's probably finite because
most things are that is a different kind
of assumption from one that says here is
a physical limit and there is no uh
rival theory on the horizon so I mean as
you know say beckenstein's Mountain does
give a finite entropy within a volume
and of course our typical you know when
we actually look at physical systems we
do tend to measure their entropy the
temperature for example and we measure
sort of total entropy by the integral
over what would happen if temperature
went to its limits uh and so we do have
physical estimates of the total amount
of entropy and physical systems we
actually deal with based on the physical
properties and those quantities are
finite right that's a very standard
thing to find in an actual physical
systems we interact with and so it's
perfectly reasonable it's a temper at
least tentatively say these look like
finite entropy systems the you know the
glass of water here is this is finite
the beckenstein bound is a good example
because actually back inside had several
bounds and uh I'm uh
I think one of them is solid the one you
mentioned but he had other bounds
um one of them turned out to be wrong
and I wrote a paper showing it was wrong
which purported to limit the maximum
speed of a computer
um and that was just wrong it was uh now
it looked right because the arguments
were very similar to the arguments uh
about the entropy being that equal to
the surface area and that kind of thing
but it wasn't right and I I have
actually authored a paper recently where
I corrected iron co-authors uh corrected
other people on mistaken judgments about
Quantum computation Quantum like that
Quantum just uh entropy of computation
bounds so I I think I think there's a
difference I mean we could have known
there was even before we discovered
those errors we could have known there
was a difference between a beckenstein
bound and the speed of light
is rests on
uh ultimately on assumptions that aren't
the direct result of well-tested uh
well-explained physical theories whereas
the speed of light is
but you and I are right now in the
context of a larger intellectual World
which accepts most of the same basic
theories that you and I are now
accepting but which mostly puts a mental
block on and analyzing the future they
basically go that's too speculative
we're just not going to do it right and
so I mean and right and so you and I can
at least share this approval of let's
take our best theories and do the best
we can to project them forward and so
again I'm interested in like going with
you there to sort of think about so I I
just gave you sort of The evolutionary
analysis or I pointed to the evolution
analysis of investment returns uh but
even a more basic one is the idea that
uh we have a discount rate today so uh
but today people discount the future in
the market and in their private actions
and that is a big issue with respect to
say global warming or something because
the market value of distant future
consequences is very low and according
to that usual discount rates we
shouldn't bother to do much to prevent
future harm
and people often think that's wrong and
we we have a evolutionary analysis that
says uh that gives a plausible
explanation for why we evolve such a
high discount rate which is to say that
um the analysis suggests that we often
have a choice between investing in
ourselves or investing in our future
Generations
and so that gives because our
descendants have typically a factor of
two difference in their uh genes related
to us that we then have a factor of two
per generation discount rate which does
roughly match the typical Market
discount rates
and so that's an explanation and it says
well we're failing sort of to
collectively care about the future
because we each care about the future
generation half as much as ourselves
and asexually reproduce producing
organisms wouldn't have this discount
rate according to standard in theory and
so these theories of sort of
self-reproducing investment funds they
would be asexually reproducing and so
they wouldn't have a discount rate and
so the prediction is that in the long
run something will arise that doesn't
have this long-term discount rate and it
will spread because it will care more
about the future and so we'll have more
future consequences and so my prediction
based on this analysis is long views are
coming even though today we don't care
much about the future because of this
inherited biological tendency to uh
discount the future at a factor of two
per generation future more asexually
reproducing organizations and units
would care more about the future and
therefore they will eventually care
about the future So eventually people
will care about the future even if not
soon that's a prediction I will make
about the future our descendants will
care about their future
so I see you can point out the potential
errors and the potential ways the
analysis could go wrong and we should do
that but still it's worth having
projections like that at least to
tentatively put them up and say does
that make sense well the the the idea
that decision Theory uh should be
analyzed in terms of how much we care
about our future selves or about our
descendants
I'm very skeptical of that theory
um because it's it's a subjective
psychological theory of really an
objective thing which is the growth of
knowledge
um so I I don't I haven't actually heard
before this this theory of of
um of whether offsprings matter
um uh I mean there's also the the I
don't know if you study the case as well
there's a there's all sooner or later
we're going to go immortal and then we
won't have Offspring and how will we
value our future then well
um I think this can't be deduced from
biology it can't be deduced from
psychology it that there will be
objective factors
so Evolution has an encoded preferences
as an us for what happens when we get
Immortal because that never happened
so uh we at the best we it would project
the preferences we have across our
lifetime into the future but that does
seem to be roughly this factor of two
per generation that we at the moment are
discounting our own personal immortality
with that is if we ask how much is it
worth to us to prevent ourselves from
dying in a century we don't actually
willing to put very many resources into
it because of this factor of two per
generation but uh but over time that
will change and then I might use an
evolutionary analysis to talk about how
that would change I might say Well when
there are Immortal creatures and there's
selection variation selection then what
kind of preferences will be selected for
um that that seems to me the way I want
to do the analysis but it seems sounds
like you're somewhat skeptical of
analyzing preferences for time using
evolution
well you're using really biological
um because it it uh it could be that
this
um number the discount rate is dominated
by say meme Evolution so suppose that
some idea spreads which say that it
ought to be some it will imply that it
ought to be some value then you will say
ah but then there's group selection
because some other some subset of the
people will will not have that Meme or
religion or whatever it will be and if
they can produce weapons faster then
they will in the long run win
so that's group selection and as you
know group selection is an extremely
problematic concept and I'm inclined to
go with
um uh Dawkins and Co to say that group
selection basically never happens even
in the biological case and when you then
take it to memes and uh societies and
civilizations
it can go wrong in all sorts of other
ways as well uh there just aren't enough
sub groups of society because that there
will be subgroups within those subgroups
who think that what they're doing is
wrong our whole society at the moment
the entire world is dominated by ideas
which say that we shouldn't make
progress on principle
either in particular cases or or we
shouldn't go too fast or whatever the
the idea that we should make progress as
fast as possible such that our point of
view will become dominant in the long
run
is almost held by nobody
and you're assuming that in the long run
that view will be superseded by some
other view that you think is is is more
viable but it need not be so
it's it's very rickety it seems to me so
David I think I think you disagree with
Robin and and just in the nature of what
he's proposing as well so for example
Robin has also said that and proposed
that well you know we humans have
explicit goals in the future we'll
evolve such that we may have explicit
goal to have more descendants that being
an idea in our mind that's like a freely
floating propensity which our future
Generations will have more than we do
um and the idea of this discount rate my
model of you is that you see thoughts as
um highly iterated and things like
culture and memes now dominate so how
would this freely floating number about
say one half or two we get in there so I
agree Daniel that the key issue here is
to think about what are our best robust
models of evolution that includes
different potential units like groups
and includes culture as well as physical
genes that is uh if we thought say a
simple model of physical Gene Evolution
was uh you know old hat not really
applicable and that the conclusions I
was talking about were dependent on that
particular set of assumptions then we
might say well look that's just the
wrong set of assumptions it's not it's
not relevant I think the the conclusions
that I've talked about are relatively
robust to the the different size units
of selection and to culture being part
of the co-evolutionary package uh and so
I I'm certainly happy to Grant and
interesting to think about that at the
moment uh our Gene a genetic induced and
culturally induced packages of behavior
are far from equilibrium that is they're
far from the thing that would be
selected for in the long run and
something has gone very wrong in the
past to induce that and I've thought a
lot about what that could be but
nevertheless when I make the long-term
predictions I set aside current behavior
and just ask what in theory would be
selected for for not just genes but Gene
culture coalitionary packages and most
of the analysis I know is robust to
which kind of packages those are it
doesn't that much whether behaviors
encoded in you know textbooks that
people teach or in genes that you know
influence an individual constructions
wherever it is there's evolutionary
analysis of what sort of behavior went
out long run you think things will
equilibrate rather than staying out of
equilibrium where culture will run away
from you yeah that is the robust
prediction that Evolution would say yes
if if some people have behavior that
produces much fewer descendants or some
people culture packages do then those
packages will lose out uh they won't
reproduce as much and in the future
there'll be more of the packages that do
reproduce more
if if the universe were infinite and
there were infinitely many cultures and
and civilizations and uh and so on and
if they were uncorrelated
so that there was no particular reason
why a particular type of culture might
take over even though it's
disadvantageous then you could make a
robust evolutionary theory of it
but I don't see how it can how it can be
robust
in predicting what errors people will
make for example like I said in 1900
they couldn't predicted the
environmental movement or nuclear power
and all the ideas that have informed the
use of those things now yes if there
were a million Earths well actually I I
think no it's not yet even if there were
a million Earth or a trillion or
whatever
there is no way of using evolutionary
theory to predict what kind of mistakes
of this kind will be made by most of
them there might be a theory of cultures
that says that certain types of mistakes
will be made some people say all
cultures destroy themselves because they
become uh
weak and and I don't believe that theory
but I'm just using it to illustrate the
fact that there is a substantive
assumption there that underlies the the
assumption that Evolution Evolution
Theory alone can determine the outcome
so as you know our standard theory of
thermodynamics both has equilibrium
versions it has fluctuation versions the
fluctuation versions predict how
fluctuations change over time and Decay
to equilibrium and of course we have
similar very Alternatives in evolution
that is evolution isn't just a theory of
a final stable State it's also a theory
of how initial deviations will Decay or
move toward the equilibrium and I think
those parameters suggest that Earth is
plenty big and the future is plenty long
for us to move from where we are now to
closer to an equilibrium isn't that I
mean do you have time estimates that say
it would take you know a trillion years
for us to acclibrate now or I think
there's no reason to to think that we're
going to equilibrate because it depends
on the creation of knowledge which is
not a relaxation process it's it's
um it's an error correcting process and
the error correcting processes can go
wrong they they're not infallible they
in fact they go wrong all the time and
what you're proposing is that there's an
overarching reason why things will come
to equilibrium
in which case you know
if you'd been around four billion years
ago you would have predicted that humans
will never exist and that that nothing
from Earth will ever get to the moon
let's just take concrete example today
religious people are more are having
higher fertility than non-religious
people so the straightforward prediction
is that over the next generation or two
there will be more religious people
right uh now at least people who
descended from religious people now you
might ask well will the children of
religious people be as religious as
their parents and of course that could
be a thing that then means that religion
doesn't actually increase but you know
we could certainly expect you know a few
Generations now more people will have
descended from religious people
than will have descended from
non-religious people because that's the
selection argument now you could say
well some new some we might discover a
new thing that suddenly helps the
non-religious people you know have a big
advantage and yes we might but just like
with the stock market is there any
particular reason to expect the the
correlation would be that way if we
don't have a particular reason that our
again our expectation is that on average
that's an explanatory assumption and
that explanatory assumption is is is is
a very kind of arbitrary assumption
compared with the things that it's kind
of purports to be about which which is
very rigid connections between the
population at one time and the
population of uh uh generation later
some things about that relationship are
rigid or you know that they're as
they're rigid in the sense that the
explanatory Theory underneath it doesn't
have any rivals
but any viable Rivals but there are
other things which aren't rigid and and
um you know people's attitude towards
the number of children they have changes
on a time scale of a generation at the
moment
it's you know it's that fast so it
you know it might it might settle down
and it might there might be an
asymptotic form of it but things that
you know things that contain
um curing complete subsystems don't have
asymptotic forms
that's you know you can you can almost
Define a a curing complete thing as a
thing that doesn't have an asymptotic
state if it runs forever
so so therefore I think it's a mistake
um to make
biology type assumptions about human
growth of knowledge just as it's a
mistake to make chemistry type
assumptions about the growth of life
so as an analogy that perhaps uh you
know on a faster time scale we have
somewhat of an evolutionary theory of
growth of the economy in the sense that
we say that there are many firms in an
industry and some of them are more
productive than others and the more
productive ones consistently grow
relative to the others and so we predict
in some ways that the that each industry
will be more productive in the future
based on an evolutionary selective
argument among the firms in the industry
it sounds like you'd say no we can't
predict that Industries will get more
productive in the future because that's
just making arbitrary assumptions about
correlations between culture and
productivity of firms which we have no
reason to believe and then do you not
believe that Industries will get more
productive in the future basically by
the selection of the more productive
firms winning as I said I I resist
believing things but I I think it's it's
a good theory and you know if I want to
plan my pension or whatever then uh I
would I would assume that there will be
economic growth in the future
but the reason and it's a selection
argument it's an evolutionary selection
argument which is one of the primary
reasons we believe there is economic
growth well the I don't know about
primary you see that that argument
depends on things like
um civilization continuing you know uh
well yeah if if uh again in 19 no
asteroid destroys everything yeah of
course but yeah well but you no World
War destroys everything
uh no uh crazy economic theory adopted
by the majority destroys everything and
again if you're choosing your pension
you're going to make those assumptions
aren't you
um well I'm I think I'm going to hedge
against those events
to some degree but you'll still mostly
bet that that's the most likely outcome
well I I I have no choice so I I it's
it's more like you know they've got this
Bitcoin thing if you really think
everything's going to hell you could
just buy a lot of Bitcoin right yeah I'm
sure you can find some people willing to
sell it to you people say that and it's
the reason is that they are not being
explicit about their assumptions again
and I I would rather say uh nothing is
secure
therefore I'm going to I'm going to make
my investments on the basis that if this
investment goes wrong I will have bigger
worries than that
for example it may be that
democracy is broken down or that there's
a world war or something like that so
then then I will I will have been wrong
about my investment you know I I should
have put all my money in into rubidium
because that's the basis of the Future
Weapons but I was not to know that
so so when I try to do future analysis
one of the biggest uh contrary
assumptions or scenarios that I focus on
is what if we end up creating a strong
world government that strongly regulates
Investments and reproduction and other
sorts of things and then prevents the
sort of competitive environment in which
the evolutionary analysis applies and
I'm very concerned about this scenario
that is my best Judgment of our biggest
long-term risk in terms of you know the
thing we should focus attention on is
this creation of a strong
civilization-wide government say solar
system-wide government that is going to
be wary of competition and wary of
allowing independent choices and
probably wary of allowing Interstellar
colonization that is this vast expansion
into the universe could well be
prevented and stopped by that so I'm I'm
very into sort of a baseline set of
assumptions and the conclusions and then
asking what's the most likely or the
biggest thing that could go wrong there
and that would be my guess for the
biggest thing that could go wrong it
seems more useful to have a concrete
scenario like that that I can get my
hands on and think about than just the
general idea that hey who knows you
might be wrong I agree and that the
concreteness is what I would call the
explanatoriness I mean that that is
explaining how things could go wrong
there's also the fact that
um though that things could go wrong in
a way that our existing explanations
don't predict but by the way
you haven't yet
spoken of a type of prediction that I
don't think you should be making or that
I good all the specific examples you've
given are I would just
if you like it's it's it's a kind of
it's a matter of terminology but it
isn't a matter of terminology it's a
matter of epistemology and fundamental
Theory but the bottom line is you
haven't yet given an example where I
would disagree with you that something
is worth investigating
um but I also think that if
if let's say there's going to be a a
conditional on
the our civilization or our species not
surviving for the next century
uh I think it is overwhelmingly likely
that the reason will be one that we
haven't thought of yet
um we should work on thinking of more
things
absolutely that that's that's that's my
basic conclusion that that I'm all over
that I'm I'm into generating new
scenarios for things that go wrong that
other people haven't been talking about
I I have been generating such scenarios
great great and but this is just a
special case of the fact that what we
really should be doing is creating more
knowledge more general purpose knowledge
knowledge that is potentially applicable
to applications that we don't yet know
so one of them is the one you've just
mentioned but there's also just doing
pure mathematics or or uh you know
working on things that don't even have
names yet
I agree we should have some broad just
exploration of all possible areas of
knowledge which isn't terribly directed
by any particular goals but then we
should also focus our attention on
particular things that seem promising
for particular reasons so for example I
have this book the age of M or as you
may know takes a very particular
technology scenario which some people
might find out unlikely and just tries
to work through in great detail all the
consequences of that and my you know
justification would be even if you think
it only has a one percent chance if it's
worth having 100 books on the future
then it's worth having a book like this
because with this and the other 99 books
we could like lay out a picture of a
wide range of options right and so uh
that seems to me that we should just
take particular scenarios that we can
think are are not crazy and work out
their consequences to think about what
would happen if we should but but just
just as a side remark you've caught me
in in an illegitimate use of probability
when I said that I think it's
overwhelmed given that given that the uh
on the assumption that the civilization
of our species will be destroyed then
it's overwhelmingly likely that it will
be I shouldn't have said that and this
just shows How Deeply
um this mistaken notion of probability
of of ideas having probabilities has
permeated our culture uh even though I
hate it I can't help using it
so as you know there are betting markets
out there and you can interpret betting
markets as representing probabilities
and in fact there's standard theorems in
finance how you can represent basically
all prices through some set of
probabilities
and I've worked on mechanisms to create
sort of conditional probabilities or
combinatorial probabilities we can
elaborate pretty large complicated
combinatorial sets and we have a lot of
literature that at least says these
these probability estimates are well
calibrated that is what you know when it
says 20 20 of the time that happens and
that they are relatively accurate in the
sense that compared to other ways that
make these forecasts they are are you
know giving you some the truth more
often
I mean this seems to be pretty useful to
me to have these systems that produce
calibrated accurate forecasts according
to a probabilistic measure you don't
approve of them but you probably still
want to use them I mean when when you
get a weather forecast that says 70
chance of rain then that weighs on you
more than a 10 chance right don't you
listen to these things aren't they
useful yes and and I I admit that I
think the connection between what you
might call risk and probability that is
the reason why risks can be approximated
by probabilities and also the reason why
frequencies
in certain situations can be
approximated by probabilities is an
unsolved problem
and I I think it's it's a very important
problem and if I wasn't working on other
things I would be working on that I mean
I I I think okay so until you figure
that out the rest it's not too crazy for
the rest of us to continue to use them
right I mean since we they seem to be
useful so far this appearance of use
isn't Just an Illusion right I mean we
we are actually getting substantial
value out of weather forecasts and
financial crisis assuming that there are
no there are no asteroids out there
heading on a collision course it's also
a very useful assumption in practice uh
but because the chance is low most
people would say yes but they're wrong
we don't know what the chance is and we
need the this idea that the chance is
low is is a break on the urgency of uh
working out what the chance actually is
um so we need to work on that and the
fact that
life
continues productively on the opposite
assumption isn't an argument we we need
knowledge about asteroids we need that
if there is you know if there is an
asteroid there either is or isn't an
asteroid out there heading towards us in
the next hundred years or in the next
year and that's a fact it has nothing to
do with probability probabilities can't
help us once it's in the sky
it's going to be no good with this we
can't sue anybody and say the
probability of that was very low I mean
God will just say no it wasn't it was
one it always was one I know but when
you have the Right theory of asteroids
then that it can make a stochastic
prediction and you have chance
right yeah well you need a theory of
asteroids with a theory that predicts
the their distribution
right the distribution of their
trajectories we do actually have such
theories I mean people have actually
calculated the rate of asteroids with
stochastic models like that that's a
common thing so our best theories of
planetary formation say that say that
um a gas giants ought to form
uh in the outer
um Stellar system like and indeed they
have in our solar system but all the
other solar systems we look at have them
have them be formed in in the uh near to
their star and nobody knows why and
therefore I don't hold much with with
stochastic theories of asteroids either
you might remember that the first steam
engines didn't have thermodynamics as a
basis thermodynamics was generated after
the steam engines right so you might
once you have a thing that seems to work
we might be justified in just using it
and if you say it doesn't have a good
theoretical Foundation we might say well
then go find it but we're just work is
still going to use it until you prove
theoretically that it's badly founded
that we're misjudged I I agree that that
not only can we use it but we should use
it
um so you know as I said everything
you're doing is not just legitimate but
at least the things you've told me not
just legitimate but but morally required
and it's it's a bit of a scandal that
more people aren't doing it but I think
the same is true of
all fundamental
um theories uh all fundamental right
branches of knowledge
uh we don't know how to we don't know
how to make quantum mechanics in gravity
coherent or general relativity coherent
nevertheless we're completely justified
in using each of them in their typical
current areas of application well it
using them for predicting things like
um satellite orbits but not for breaking
things like how much information you can
get into into a finite volume right so
there the theory itself says that it
doesn't know
and that's exactly what we do so if you
could tell me where exactly is
probability most problematic then I will
try to avoid it there because you've
thought more about where problematic is
problematic but if you don't mention a
particular areas especially problematic
then I'm probably just going to keep
using it because
the uh in in short the place where it's
dangerous is where the thing you're
predicting depends on the future growth
of knowledge so you we've given some
examples it still works even then like
when you're when you're saying that the
that the stock price of something will
be a random walk even when knowledge
accumulates the stock price follows
around and walk yes yes exactly so there
are cases but there are cases where it's
very misleading
uh and
um uh so for example
when you say that that all long-lived
civilizations in the past
have failed within
um well
they have failed all long-lived
civilizations
say all civilizations that have lasted
longer than 400 years if you count
houses having lasted for 300 years all
civilizations have lasted for for more
than 400 years have already failed
and therefore ours will that's
illegitimate that's that's
um because it's making an assumption
that their frequency is a probability
and
here I you know I have a substantive
theory that says why it isn't namely
that our civilization is different from
all the others in the relevant way but
it doesn't matter even if I didn't know
that theory I would still say it was
illegitimate to extrapolate the future
of our Theory based of our civilization
based on past civilizations because all
of them depended on the future growth of
knowledge and they if you look in detail
actually at how they failed they all
failed in different ways they but one
thing you can say about it is that in
all cases more knowledge would have
saved them
but not the growth of knowledge was in
fact the major reason for growth for all
past all of our past history that is
even biology the major reason for
Innovation biology was the growth of
knowledge for forager humans slowly over
two million years they slowly grew by
accumulating culture a growth of
knowledge of farming culture accumulated
doubling roughly every Thousand Years
through the growth of knowledge
primarily via sort of different kinds of
plants and animals were domesticated uh
the growth of knowledge has always been
the dominant factor in growth for all of
history uh that's still true today so
that does that fact doesn't distinguish
us from our ancestors maybe the way we
grow knowledge or the rate at which we
can grow is the distinction but the fact
that knowledge was growing and was the
main long-term Force has not changed
yeah it's it's the way we uh
and then we might find that our
descendants will grow knowledge even
faster and I've I've thought a lot about
sort of the ways that our descendants
might grow knowledge faster than we do
uh and what are the obstacles to our
growing knowledge now
qualitative difference not just the
difference of scale or rate
yes
uh it's it's qualitative
um
uh again just like just like the the
life as a chemical process
is different from all other chemical
processes and thinking
as a information
processing process is different from all
other information processing processes
therefore when you discuss when you try
to predict one in terms of frequencies
derived from the other you're going to
make mistakes you're going to make bad
mistakes Always by the way in the
direction of pessimism
because it's not just that we are unlike
previous civilizations we're unlike them
in a systematic way
go ahead Daniel it's a big topic and
people use probability for more than so
just matching to frequencies you know
Robin has papers on priors and stuff and
there's more there but um it's a big
topic it sounds like we we agreed to
talk for about an hour we've talked for
about an hour we we feel I feel like
we're sort of a resting or we're not in
the middle of the dispute or something
like that yeah well very interesting I
mean
um I think we should publish this
absolutely
and we'll make them take sides who's
who's the winner here right
[Laughter]
I don't think we need a winner I was
just teasing you about the previous
debate yeah yeah
okay it was a nice conversation so nice
to see you all right thank you for
hosting Daniel
welcome
bye bye